---
title: 'How to End this (and future)  pandemic(s). '
date: 2020-02-25T12:18:00.000Z
description: How to End this (and future)  pandemic(s). 
author: Jurgen
featuredImage: ../../images/img_2.jpg
category: essay
---

## How to End this (and future)  pandemic(s). 

---


By now it should be clear that solidarity alone won't be our saving grace against the pandemic. Despite the data making it clear that this is not "just the flu" the debate continues to rage on whether the pandemic is real with no shortage of public pleas being made to ignore the conspiracy theorists (NYT, BBC, VF, TIME). The truth is most people will probably be fine, but you (or someone you infect) could also end up dead or with chronic health issues. Not enough is discussed about the long-term effects of Covid-19. The disease is still new, so we really have no idea. It's likely that more severe cases, those requiring hospitalization, present serious risk of permanent damage to the heart, lungs, and other organs. This virus has already resulted in a health 28-year old undergoing a double lung transplant. 
Of great significance is the fact that we also don't know how long immunity lasts or what will happen if people catch it a second time. We hope that it will be milder the second time, but we really don't know.
It is my belief that the best cure for any disease is to go on the offensive and attack the disease.
The biggest challenge with this is in setting up a comprehensive system to continuously track the virus and a set of tools to destroy it. The greatest challenge is that the virus is spread through people with minimal or no symptoms who are responsible for much, if not most, of the disease transmission as well as through surfaces and airborne transmission. If we could flip the tables on this 'invisible enemy' and make it visible, it would be easy to stop the spread.
But for now, we need to behave as though the virus is everywhere and anywhere and that anyone could be spreading this virus. You can take basic precautions like wearing a mask, avoiding crowds and being in closed areas with limited air circulation. But keep in mind that others have done this and still got infected. 
The one saving grace is that, for now, disease severity seems to be determined in part by the degree of exposure. Even if we don't avoid the virus 100%, reducing it by 80% could be the difference between something mild and something life-threatening. 
This is also the reason why it's important that everyone wears a mask or other face covering when they are in a shared space. Unfortunately, we've all seen the outrage from some segments of the population and how they feed into the people who are neutral on whether a mask is necessary or not. I get people daily 'advising me' that "You don't need to wear a mask - we're just doing it to avoid the fine". Masks are not only a very simple, low cost intervention but it's also been proven to not impact anyone's ability to breath even using it at long intervals. It's confusing to me how difficult it appears to be for some people to wear a mask and how much they tie that to their freedom or conversely the amount of institutional oppression they have to deal with. I'm not gonna lie - it's make me lose a bit of faith in the collective intelligence of humanity. 
In order to attack the virus, the first step is to test, test, test. With fast and early detection we can prevent the spread of the virus to more people (especially those most at risk) and more effectively treat to prevent the disease from progressing to the more dangerous stages. 
We need an abundance of testing, made available to all. Point of care and home testing should be available daily. And because Covid-19 can also be hard to trace in some instances in the earliest days of infection, we need to retest even when we are negative. 
A test that is fast and easy so that we can use it every day and detect the disease at the earliest possible stage, before we begin transmitting it to others. This will ensure that everyone get the best possible early treatment, minimize the risk of serious complications, and avoid unknowingly spreading it. 
The virus only persists because we are unable to stop it from spreading. If we were able to: 
Identify and quarantine everyone who is contagious, including those who are asymptomatic;
Decontaminate surfaces and air flow immediately and consistently; 
Identify the emergence of new disease outbreaks whether coronaviruses or similar;

then we could let everyone else out of lockdown and resume ordinary social and economic activity.
Ubiquitous rapid daily screening, contact tracing and isolating.
Even with imperfect screening, if we are able to prevent 90% of disease transmission, then the virus's reproductive number, or R0, will drop below one and the pandemic will quickly fade. There is no risk of reintroduction from the outside because any new outbreaks will quickly be caught and contained. This approach is generally considered impractical because the current medical testing technology, based on RT-PCR, is slow, expensive, unpleasant, and in short supply. Therefore, we require a better technology, one capable of providing a test that is fast, easy, and abundant. There are a number of technologies that could be used to create such a test, but until one is proven at scale, we won't know which approach is best. I'm currently working on a set of rapid solutions that give highly accurate results (>95%) in under 15 mins (and I'm looking to back more). If no virus is detected, then you're not contagious. If the virus is detected, or the results are ambiguous, then you can take steps to avoid spreading the virus (such as wearing a mask and staying home) and will be referred to a doctor to receive appropriate care. With rapid testing at scale, we can screen for the virus at the entrances to buildings and other areas, much like we currently use metal detectors to screen for weapons. Many places are already using thermometers to screen for infection, but unfortunately that is not good enough because not everyone who is contagious has a fever. I expect the virus screening will initially be deployed at essential locations such as hospitals, warehouses, and factories. Longer term, it can be used to safely reopen more crowded areas such as festivals, sporting events, and bring the travel industry back to its feet. 
Unmanned, automatic surface and air scanning. 
Testing is a great foundational solution because it stops the virus from spreading p2p. But unfortunately, the virus can also be spread from surfaces and/or air. Deploying technology that automatically monitors for viral contaminants in the background is critical to bypass errors in human reporting or inefficient reporting of any kind. Systems such as this exist and have started being deployed, quietly monitoring the air around by sucking in large quantities of air and trapping aerosolized virus particles and anything else that's present. Today, these are used to track for Covid-19 particles that have to be confirmed in a lab, a process that takes several days (too slow in an exponentially growing pandemic). In a few months, these systems should be in position to instantly confirm the presence of virus and signal the activation of contamination systems (e.g. quarantines, etc). In the future, these systems should be able to constantly monitor air quality and then be fed new information through a central backend to start tracking for newly discovered viruses. These same systems could of course be used to scan for the presence of viruses (ethical issues can and will arise of course) in humans before they enter populated areas or even their homes. 
Unmanned, automatic surface and air decontamination. 
Once we've confirmed the physical presence of a virus in a location, why would we need to wait to deploy precious human resources to decontaminate the area when we can do so with unmanned, robotic systems. In fact, such systems were instrumental in the Chinese response to Covid-19. These same systems can be deployed globally to decontaminate everything from hospitals, subways, malls, public squares and much more to reduce many source of possible viral or bacterial contamination. These robotic carriers can take the form of drones, fixed building robotics or mobile robotics as well as other, yet to be conceived mediums. What if the automatic detection systems communicate directly with these unmanned robotics to deploy decontamination protocols without delay? Not only are we tracking who is infected and which areas are infected, but now we are in fact proactively treating these areas. 
AI system to monitor, identify, model and predict disease outbreaks.
The tactics referenced above are good enough to stop the spread and increase confidence with the current pandemic. But given how long it takes to develop effective and accurate testing for new strains of infectious diseases, and the expectation that there could be more potentially more lethal viral diseases on the horizon, it is much wiser that we develop and employ technologies that constantly monitor global data to identify new diseases and have the medical capacity ready to respond. Systems such as these already exist in some shape or form. (see Laboratory Response Network, National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) among others). But these systems must be modernized and globalized to provide rapid and reliable surveillance with higher data that feed seamlessly into AI systems that have the ability to flag outbreaks before they are even outbreaks. In the event that one falls through the cracks, the support system should have the ability to instantly activate the support system with minimal room for human speculation over whether it's just another flu. 



---

As bad as this virus is, it could be much worse. Our world is far too interconnected and too vulnerable to continue operating without a more sophisticated and technologically advanced system. We must never again allow a pandemic to threaten our health and disrupt our society. With the ability to screen for multiple viruses, we can not only end this pandemic, but also prevent the next. We could potentially even eliminate the cold and flu (both of which have a lower R0, and are therefore more easily stopped). This will save millions of lives and trillions of dollars.
Don't be drawn into dystopian visions of the future - a world shut down by one virus after another, where people are afraid to gather together, afraid to travel, afraid to be physically close even to those they love.
It doesn't have to be that way. We can emerge from this pandemic better and stronger and healthier than ever. We can forever put an end to lockdowns and social distancing. Technology is the key. We have the chance to show fast our wonderful new age of innovation can take us - before we can no longer take it for granted.
